we haven't introduced the marver yet, but
the marver is a steel table, and it was
originally made of marble, and they're
now made of steel, and it's a very, very
powerful tool. But it's also very
difficult to use because the marver
requires very good pipe control. It
requires you to maintain the pipe at a
constant level and to be able to roll the
pipe very smoothly. If you're able to do
that, you're going to be able to do some
fantastic stuff to fix pieces and shape
pieces using the marver. So let's
begin with your basic pipe rolling,
and we're going to bring it over to a
marvering exercise. Now, again, body
position is very important. A lot of
people, when they're beginning to blow
glass, will marver like this. They'll
stay away from the glass, and again, I
think it's mostly because they tend to be
afraid of the glass. You need to do
exactly the opposite when you're
marvering. You want to have this right
hand forward, this left hand forward, and
you want to get as close to the front of
the piece as you can. As a matter of
fact, you should slide that left hand
forward as far as you can once you're
working with a hot pipe. Now, this may
require cooling the pipe. We'll get to
that later. But for the sake of this
exercise, let's pretend the pipe is cool
right to about the two-foot point. So put
your left hand at that two-foot mark, and
put your right hand wherever it's
comfortable. Now you're going to come to
the marver, and you're going to stand
close to the marver and slide your hands
back so that you can see what's going on.
You want to get your face right over
where that hot glass is going to be. So
instead of standing like this, you're
going to stand like that. So standing at
the marver, you're going to rotate the
pipe smoothly
over the end of the whole marver. And you
can hear my old blowpipe there making a
bunch of noise. And it's okay to lean out
a little bit.
Sometimes it's good to keep your feet
still if you want to move smoothly.
And that's it. Back and forth across the
marver. If you can move back and forth
across the marver at about the speed that
I was doing, smoothly without stopping,
you're fine. Now, faster is not
necessarily better. If you can go like
that,not going to do any good, because
the glass isn't going to require that
much speed. But if you're slow, if you
can only move like this, that may be a
little bit too slow. And the point is, as
you're doing this first exercise, work
both hands. Now, it's fairly easy to
cheat on this first exercise and just
sort of go like that with your
fingertips. But that's why we've got the
second exercise, because once you've
mastered that first exercise, back and
forth on the marver with the pipe being
supported by the marver,It's time for the
second exercise, which is the real
marvering exercise. The real marvering
exercise involves supporting the pipe,
and you're going to do this by putting
that left hand forward, having that right
hand over the back, and holding the pipe
level at about four inches above
the marver. You want to now roll the
pipe, and simulate rolling a piece of
glass as you move smoothly
across the marver.
Get to the end, stop, rotate the other
direction, all the way back.
And you'll notice, as I do this, my pipe
goes up and down a little bit. That's
okay. It's not going to be perfect.
But what you want to do is do it without
stopping. So in other words, you don't
want to do this,
where you stop the pipe
turning. So hopefully those
pipe rolling skills are already getting
down into your hands, and you can start
rotating the pipe automatically.
So those are the two basic marvering
exercises. Now as you're doing those, you
want to do them in three orientations.
The first one is down. So
You put this right hand down, left
hand up, you're going to roll like that.
This simulates
rolling a first gather off the pipe.
And that's a fairly important move. I'm
sort of bumping into my bench here.
Normally, I keep the marver a little bit
farther forward. The second motion is
that one we just did. Smoothly
level, back and forth.
And the third motion is up at an angle,
about a 45-degree angle, to pretend that
you're marvering the tip of a piece of
glass.
Now, everyone feels silly doing these
exercises. I know it's going to feel
silly to go into a glass studio, grab a
cold pipe, walk up to a marver, and, you
know, have your imaginary glass and your
imaginary friends watching you making
nothing. It's very important, though,
that you do these exercises, because once
you do them, and you learn how to rotate
that pipe automatically, you can do that
automatically once you've got the glass
on. And that's the most important thing.
Once you get the glass on, the glass is
going to distract you from everything
else that you've been doing with the
marver. The final thing you want to work
on in this exercise is an active and
passive left hand. What do I mean by
active? If I'm turning the pipe with both
hands, I have an active left hand, so I
will be turning with both hands. So you
watch my left hand. My left hand's
actually supplying some power there. You
can see the fingers moving. And then the
other direction, I sort of cup it and
move it like that. Now,
that's a fine way to marver. If you have
to use your left hand in an active
manner, that's great. Now, once you get
really good, you will be able to marver
with a passive left hand. So you use your
left hand just as a yoke, and I'm going to
sort of exaggerate it here. But I'm
turning the pipe continuously with just
my right hand. Notice how much smoother
that motion is. Because my left hand
isn't moving, it's not making the pipe
bounce up and down. So if I want to
really marver a piece smoothly, I will
use my left hand not to turn the
pipe, but just to support it. And that
motion, then, is much smoother because
all the rotation is coming from here, and
my height adjustment is coming from the
left hand. So the final step
is to do both exercises with
an active and a passive left hand.
And you're done.